---
layout: post
title:  "TODO: title"
date:   2017-04-27 12:00:00 -0500
categories: videogames school education
---

About seven years ago, author Jane McGonigal gave a TED talk, stressing a peculiar point that we need to be playing more video games.[^1] **TODO: Rest of intro**

> 30 Billion hours is not enough to solve the world's problems.
> - Jane McGonigal, 20xx, TedX[^1]

For a long time, I was your typical gamer. I liked most of the popular video game titles out there such as Battlefield, Minecraft, Prison Architect, and everything in between. About two years ago, I stumbled across a game called Kerbal Space Program. It looked interesting enough, build a rocket, go to the moon, and try to not blow up. It seemed simple enough, but within my first hour of playing the game, that statement couldn't be farther from the truth. Almost all of my first few missions ended up something [like this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UKUz5ZUPqM8).

As I would do with any other game where I hit a dead-end with my current knowledge, I turned to the Internet for help. I found wiki pages and videos explaining concepts of the game. The more I learned, the more complex rockets I was able to build, which led to more numerous and difficult problems. Eventually, I started to cross a line where in-game "key sequences" suddenly turned into complex formulas and simulations using NASA's GMAT tool. My reading list slowly started to get replaced with various math and aerospace engineering books. My free time between my classes was spent toying with formulas for a perfect Hohmann maneuver on my next mission. All of this, just from playing one game. It didn't stop there though.

A few months ago, I was randomly clicking through Reddit until I came across the [/r/hoggit](https://reddit.com/r/hoggit) subreddit. I had spent some time fooling around back in the day with Microsoft Flight Simulator 98 and 2000, but wasn't really interested by it. The sub itself revolved around several different sims, but mainly stood behind DCS: World. Flipping through the Steam page, it was a military combat flight sim. It used highly accurate simulations combined with highly detailed aircraft to make it more or less the most advanced military flight sim you're going to get on a home PC. It was free, and my PC could handle it, so I figured I would give it a try. Launching the sim for the first time threw me straight into the cockpit of a Russian SU-25T. My first couple of solo flights (i.e. no enemies), ended in giant balls of fire. My first few firefights involved me flying into a panic and performing pointless barrel rolls at the slightest hint of a radar lock from enemy aircraft.

Over time, however, I got better at it. After about a week, I was able to land without making a crater. After about four weeks (and buying an actual air superiority fighter, the Russian SU-27) I was able to calmly zip around in combat, mowing down AI aircraft left and right. Over time though, I started looking into how real world pilots fly their planes. I learned what all that in game radio chatter actually meant. I learned what vectors are and how to navigate using them. I even learned what happens when you [punch out above mach 1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xsp0kGrwXW4) (basically death). The same thing that happened with KSP was now happening here. Key sequences started to turn into procedures. I actually knew what was going on with the plane when I started pressing buttons. From there, I started to grasp what was going on inside my plane while I was flying.

**TODO: Find external link between gaming and learning opportunities.**

**TODO: Tie in to education system reform.**

## Note to Educators

What I am saying is not a new concept at all. However, this is a new spin how this idea should be implemented. The closest we have right now is a school in New York called Quest to Learn.[^2] Right now, we have educational experiences disguised as video games. This is not going to work. We need to approach this from the other side. Build video games first, then let the learning happen on its own. Going back to Kerbal Space Program, this game doesn't shove formulas in your face, giving obvious pointers to the only correct solution. KSP is different in that there is no single solution. There's nothing to "push" your designs in the right direction.

<div style='position:relative;padding-bottom:54%'><iframe src='https://gfycat.com/ifr/HarmoniousColossalHarrierhawk' frameborder='0' scrolling='no' width='100%' height='100%' style='position:absolute;top:0;left:0' allowfullscreen></iframe></div>
*Unlike other games, KSP does not have any set goals or recommended solutions to solving any given problem. This allows players to be as creative as they like when devising solutions to presented problems.*

Along the same lines, there is no set "problems" in KSP. You are given a vast universe and a heap of parts. It is up to the player to decide what they want to do. Visit the Mün? [Build a fail-tolerant satalite network?](http://i.imgur.com/4NLhz0Q.png) Make the long-distance trek to Duna? [Build a toilet/plane/bird-thing?](https://gfycat.com/LittleTinyAiredaleterrier) [How about sending a 72727 airplane into space?](http://imgur.com/XtpbfYh) The point is that you get to pick what you want to solve. The universe is too inviting to have any player content with sitting on the launchpad. **TODO: Finish point**

Now I'm not suggesting we start installing Steam on all the school computers and have the students sit there all day. There still needs to be structure, and some guidance to keep the students moving along. If we fully utilized the Euclidian method of learning in our current education system, no one would ever graduate. While learning through experimentation is good (and half the point of this post), sometimes it takes too long. To add to this, this is not going to be an overnight solution. This is going to be a slow and steady change to our classrooms. This is where I would advocate Jane McGonigal's suggestions in her book Reality Is Broken to turn everything into a game. As mentioned above though, this is not what we want. It is only a step in the right direction. This approach needs to be taken slowly because this is a new domain. We don't have video game-based learning broken down into an exact science. The first few attempts of this is just going to be throwing stuff at the wall and seeing what sticks. **TODO: Finish message to educators**

## Note to Parents

**TODO: Message to parents**

## Note to Students

**TODO: Message to students**

## Note to Video Game Developers

Developers, you are experiencing a literal game-changing period in the education/technology sector. Knowing how distrustful some educational systems can be of major changes, we only have one chance at this.  **TODO: Finish message to video game developers.**

## Conclusion

**TODO: Conclusion**

## Sources

[^1]: [https://www.ted.com/talks/jane_mcgonigal_gaming_can_make_a_better_world](https://www.ted.com/talks/jane_mcgonigal_gaming_can_make_a_better_world)
[^2]: [http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=128081896](http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=128081896)
